knowledge/pages/general/README.md, before:

<!--
id: readme
tags: ''
-->

# Htaccess Manager

![htaccess](../../images/htaccess.jpg)

## Summary

A PHP tool for .htaccess management in your web projects.

* Allows you to include _.htaccess_ files in other _.htaccess_ files.
* Work with smaller files then combine using `./bin/htaccess build`
* Share common snippets across different _.htaccess_ files.
* Simplified URL redirection; remap old URLs to new without nasty syntax.
* Merge in remote _.htaccess_ source files on build (think Drupal web root _.htaccess_ + custom _.htaccess_ directives).
* Manage banned IPs in a separate file or add them to the YAML configuration.

## Quick Start

- Create a YAML configuration file in a secure location in your project.
- Refer to _config.example.yml_ as a guide and optionally, delete when done.
- Lastly, build your files using `./vendor/bin/htaccess build path/to/your/config.yml`

{{ composer.install|raw }}

## Configuration Special Notes

* You must list one or more hosts in `valid_hosts`, including their http or https protocol.
* Forced SSL redirection is detected based on the `valid_hosts` array; `force_ssl` will be set to `true` if all `valid_hosts` use the _https_ protocol. You may override auto-detection by setting `force_ssl` to `true` or `false`.
* Adding or removing `www.` is detected based on the `valid_hosts` array. It is set to `add` if all `valid_hosts` have `www.`, `remove` if all `valid_hosts` do not have `www.`. When neither `add` nor `remove` no redirection takes place. You may override auto-detection by setting `www_prefix` to `add`, `remove`, or `default`.

## Usage

- To view help execute `./vendor/bin/htaccess`

{{ funding|raw }}

## More Reading

* [THE Ultimate Htaccess](https://www.askapache.com/htaccess)
* [Mod_Rewrite Variables Cheatsheet](https://www.askapache.com/htaccess/mod_rewrite-variables-cheatsheet/)
* [Htaccess](https://www.askapache.com/category/htaccess/)

## Troubleshooting

### 4xx redirects are not working

I'm not sure why, but on some servers they do not work. Possible reasons:

1. Apache version?
2. VirtualHost config hijacking?
3. Drupal conflict?

Commit message:

Introduce environment variable substitution in configuration files
Added `SubstituteEnvVars` helper to support environment variable substitution across configuration file keys and values. Integrated the helper into `LoadConfig`. Added unit test `LoadConfigEnvVarTest` to validate the functionality, and updated the README with usage examples for substitution syntax. https://github.com/aklump/htaccess-manager/issues/1

knowledge/pages/general/README.md, after:

<!--
id: readme
tags: ''
-->

# Htaccess Manager

![htaccess](../../images/htaccess.jpg)

## Summary

A PHP tool for .htaccess management in your web projects.

* Allows you to include _.htaccess_ files in other _.htaccess_ files.
* Work with smaller files then combine using `./bin/htaccess build`
* Share common snippets across different _.htaccess_ files.
* Simplified URL redirection; remap old URLs to new without nasty syntax.
* Merge in remote _.htaccess_ source files on build (think Drupal web root _.htaccess_ + custom _.htaccess_ directives).
* Manage banned IPs in a separate file or add them to the YAML configuration.

## Quick Start

- Create a YAML configuration file in a secure location in your project.
- Refer to _config.example.yml_ as a guide and optionally, delete when done.
- Lastly, build your files using `./vendor/bin/htaccess build path/to/your/config.yml`

{{ composer.install|raw }}

## Configuration Special Notes

* You must list one or more hosts in `valid_hosts`, including their http or https protocol.
* Forced SSL redirection is detected based on the `valid_hosts` array; `force_ssl` will be set to `true` if all `valid_hosts` use the _https_ protocol. You may override auto-detection by setting `force_ssl` to `true` or `false`.
* Adding or removing `www.` is detected based on the `valid_hosts` array. It is set to `add` if all `valid_hosts` have `www.`, `remove` if all `valid_hosts` do not have `www.`. When neither `add` nor `remove` no redirection takes place. You may override auto-detection by setting `www_prefix` to `add`, `remove`, or `default`.

## Usage

- To view help execute `./vendor/bin/htaccess`

## Environment Variable Substitution

The configuration file supports environment variable substitution. You can use `$VAR_NAME` or `${VAR_NAME}` syntax in both keys and values of the YAML file. Using `${VAR_NAME}` is recommended to avoid ambiguity when a variable is immediately followed by other characters. This is useful for creating template-like configurations that can be customized per project.

```yaml
files:
  ${PROJ_ID}:
    title: $PROJ_TITLE
    valid_hosts:
      - https://example.com
    output:
      - ${PROJ_DIR}/web/.htaccess
```

When running the build command, provide the environment variables:

```bash
PROJ_ID=myproject PROJ_TITLE="AKlump's Web Factory" PROJ_DIR=./path ./bin/htaccess build config.yaml
```

{{ funding|raw }}

## More Reading

* [THE Ultimate Htaccess](https://www.askapache.com/htaccess)
* [Mod_Rewrite Variables Cheatsheet](https://www.askapache.com/htaccess/mod_rewrite-variables-cheatsheet/)
* [Htaccess](https://www.askapache.com/category/htaccess/)

## Troubleshooting

### 4xx redirects are not working

I'm not sure why, but on some servers they do not work. Possible reasons:

1. Apache version?
2. VirtualHost config hijacking?
3. Drupal conflict?
